# Usage

---

`@nuxtjs/sanity` provides key composables to interact with data from your Sanity project.

1. `useSanityQuery` and `useLazySanityQuery`. These composables allow automatic fetching of Sanity queries.
2. `useSanity`. This is the most customisable way to access data from your Sanity project, and exposes a Sanity client you can use to perform fetches or more advanced patterns (like subscribing to updates).

## useSanityQuery

This is a data fetching composable that wraps `useAsyncData` from Nuxt 3 (see [docs](https://v3.nuxtjs.org/docs/usage/data-fetching#useasyncdata)).

The only mandatory argument is the query for it to fetch. You can also pass params, and an options object. In addition to the options you can pass to `useAsyncData`, there is also a `client` option for specifying which configured Sanity client you would like to use.

If you pass any ref/computed parameters in `params`, `useSanityQuery` will automatically refetch the query when these parameters change.

::alert{type="info"}
This composable is only available in Nuxt 3. For Bridge, you will need to use `useLazySanityQuery` instead.
::

### Example

```ts
const query = groq`*[_type == "post" && topic == $topic][0..10]`
const { data, refresh } = useSanityQuery(query, { topic: 'News' })
```

## useLazySanityQuery

This is an equivalent query that does not block client-side navigation and uses `useLazyAsyncData` under the hood. Other than that, the API is identical to `useSanityQuery` above.

## useSanity

You can access a Sanity helper/client throught your application with the globally available `useSanity()` composable.

Unlike `useSanityQuery` and `useLazySanityQuery`, `useSanity` is also available within your Nitro server routes in exactly the same way as within your Nuxt app.

::alert{type="info"}
If you want to access this helper globally through `$sanity` - as in a prior version of this module - ensure you've set the `globalHelper` option to true.
::

### Reference

#### `fetch`

This enables you to perform a GROQ query against your Sanity dataset. By default it returns a `Promise<unknown>` although you can customise the type of the return.

##### Example with `asyncData`

<br />

::code-group
```html [JavaScript]
<script setup>
const query = groq`{ "articles": *[_type == "article"] }`

const sanity = useSanity()

const { data } = await useAsyncData('articles', () => sanity.fetch(query))
</script>
```

```html [TypeScript]
<script setup lang="ts">
const query = groq`{ "articles": *[_type == "article"] }`

const sanity = useSanity()

// By default it returns a `Promise<unknown>`,
// but you can customise the type of the return.
const { data } = await useAsyncData('articles', () => sanity.fetch<{ articles: Article[] }>(query))
</script>
```
::

#### `client`

You can access the underlying client with this property. This is most useful if not using the minimal client.

```ts
const query = groq`*[_type == "article"][0].title`

export default defineComponent({
  setup() {
    const sanity = useSanity()
    onMounted(() => {
      const observable = sanity.client.listen(query)
      observable.subscribe(event => {
        // Do something
      })
    })
  },
})
```

#### `setToken`

You can securely set the token for your Sanity client in a Nuxt plugin.

```js{}[plugins/sanity.server.ts]
export default defineNuxtPlugin((nuxtApp) => {
  const sanity = useSanity()
  const token = getTokenFromReq(nuxtApp.ssrContext.req)
  sanity.setToken(token)
})
```

#### `config`

You can access the Sanity config you have passed into the module if you need to do so (for example, with `@sanity/image-url`):

```js{}[plugins/sanity.ts]
import imageUrlBuilder from '@sanity/image-url'
export default defineNuxtPlugin(() => {
  const sanity = useSanity()
  const builder = imageUrlBuilder(sanity.config)

  function urlFor(source) {
    return builder.image(source)
  }

  return {
    provide: { urlFor }
  }
})
```

#### Additional clients

If you have [configured additional clients](/getting-started/configuration#additionalclients) you can access them by passing in a client name to `useSanity`. It returns a sanity helper, with all the same properties and methods as specified above. So, for example:

```js{}[plugins/fetch.ts]
export default defineNuxtPlugin(() => {
  const otherSanityHelper = useSanity('other')
  otherSanityHelper.fetch('*[type == "article"][0]')
})
```
