`@nuxtjs/sanity` provides key composables to interact with data from your Sanity project.

1. `useSanityQuery` and `useLazySanityQuery`. These composables allow automatic fetching of Sanity queries.
2. `useSanity`. This is the most customisable way to access data from your Sanity project, and exposes a Sanity client you can use to perform fetches or more advanced patterns (like subscribing to updates).

## useSanityQuery

This is a data fetching composable that wraps `useAsyncData` from Nuxt (see [docs](https://nuxt.com/docs/getting-started/data-fetching#useasyncdata)).

The only mandatory argument is the query for it to fetch. You can also pass params, and an options object. In addition to the options you can pass to `useAsyncData`, there is also a `client` option for specifying which configured Sanity client you would like to use.

If you pass any ref/computed parameters in `params`, `useSanityQuery` will automatically refetch the query when these parameters change.

### Example

```ts
const query = groq`*[_type == "post" && topic == $topic][0..10]`
const { data, refresh } = useSanityQuery(query, { topic: 'News' })
```

You can also type the result of your query by passing a generic to `useSanityQuery`:

```ts
// data will be typed as Ref<Post | null>
const query = groq`*[_type == "post" && topic == $topic][0..10]`
const { data, refresh } = useSanityQuery<Post>(query, { topic: 'News' })
```

### Query Options

You can pass a `queryOptions` object to customise the options sent to the underlying Sanity client fetch call. This allows you to override the automatically resolved options for specific queries.

```ts
const { data } = useSanityQuery(query, params, {
  queryOptions: {
    perspective: 'published',
    tag: 'my-custom-tag',
    useCdn: false,
  },
})
```

Any options passed via `queryOptions` will take priority over the module's automatically resolved values. See the [`@sanity/client` documentation](https://www.sanity.io/docs/js-client#fetch) for the full list of available options.

### Automatic Type Generation

When [type generation](/getting-started/typegen) is enabled, you can use auto-generated types based on your query variable names:

```ts
// Query variable: postsQuery -> Generated type: PostsQueryResult
const postsQuery = groq`*[_type == "post" && topic == $topic][0..10]`
const { data, refresh } = useSanityQuery<PostsQueryResult>(postsQuery, { topic: 'News' })
```

See the [Type Generation](/getting-started/typegen) guide for setup instructions.

## useLazySanityQuery

This is an equivalent query that does not block client-side navigation and uses `useLazyAsyncData` under the hood. Other than that, the API is identical to `useSanityQuery` above.

## useSanity

You can access a Sanity helper/client throught your application with the globally available `useSanity()` composable.

Unlike `useSanityQuery` and `useLazySanityQuery`, `useSanity` is also available within your Nitro server routes in exactly the same way as within your Nuxt app.

::tip
If you want to access this helper globally through `$sanity` - as in a prior version of this module - ensure you've set the `globalHelper` option to true.
::

### Reference

#### `fetch`

This enables you to perform a GROQ query against your Sanity dataset. By default it returns a `Promise<unknown>` although you can customise the type of the return.

##### Example with `asyncData`

<br />

::code-group
```html [JavaScript]
<script setup>
const query = groq`{ "articles": *[_type == "article"] }`

const sanity = useSanity()

const { data } = await useAsyncData('articles', () => sanity.fetch(query))
</script>
```

```html [TypeScript]
<script setup lang="ts">
const query = groq`{ "articles": *[_type == "article"] }`

const sanity = useSanity()

// By default it returns a `Promise<unknown>`,
// but you can customise the type of the return.
const { data } = await useAsyncData('articles', () => sanity.fetch<{ articles: Article[] }>(query))
</script>
```
::

#### `client`

You can access the underlying client with this property. This is most useful if not using the minimal client.

```ts
const query = groq`*[_type == "article"][0].title`

export default defineComponent({
  setup() {
    const sanity = useSanity()
    onMounted(() => {
      const observable = sanity.client.listen(query)
      observable.subscribe(event => {
        // Do something
      })
    })
  },
})
```

#### `setToken`

You can securely set the token for your Sanity client in a Nuxt plugin.

```js{}[plugins/sanity.server.ts]
export default defineNuxtPlugin((nuxtApp) => {
  const sanity = useSanity()
  const token = getTokenFromReq(nuxtApp.ssrContext.req)
  sanity.setToken(token)
})
```

#### `config`

You can access the Sanity config you have passed into the module if you need to do so (for example, with `@sanity/image-url`):

```js{}[plugins/sanity.ts]
import imageUrlBuilder from '@sanity/image-url'
export default defineNuxtPlugin(() => {
  const sanity = useSanity()
  const builder = imageUrlBuilder(sanity.config)

  function urlFor(source) {
    return builder.image(source)
  }

  return {
    provide: { urlFor }
  }
})
```

#### Additional clients

If you have [configured additional clients](/getting-started/configuration#additionalclients) you can access them by passing in a client name to `useSanity`. It returns a sanity helper, with all the same properties and methods as specified above. So, for example:

```js{}[plugins/fetch.ts]
export default defineNuxtPlugin(() => {
  const otherSanityHelper = useSanity('other')
  otherSanityHelper.fetch('*[type == "article"][0]')
})
```

#### Private Datasets

You can use the `queryEndpoint` configuration option to set the endpoint for all requests made with `useSanityQuery`. This is especially useful when querying private datasets or making requests that require tokens that cannot be safely exposed on the client.

This module does not provide a built-in handler for proxying queries to private datasets. Instead, it includes a convenience function that makes it straightforward to implement a server-side handler for most use cases.

To control which queries can be made against a private dataset, you can use `validateSanityQuery`. At build time, the module scans your codebase, extracts all GROQ queries, and compiles them into a whitelist. At runtime, incoming queries are checked against this list, and by default an error is thrown if a query is not recognized. You can optionally limit extraction to specific files via the function’s second argument.

```ts{}[server/api/fetch.ts]
export default defineEventHandler(async (event) => {
  const { query, params = {}, options } = await readBody(event)

  await validateSanityQuery(query)

  const sanity = useSanity()
  const client = sanity.client.withConfig({ token: process.env.NUXT_SANITY_READ_TOKEN })

  return client.fetch(query, params, options)
})
```

::warning
`validateSanityQuery` only validates query strings, not parameters. If you define queries that use dynamic parameters, you must ensure those queries are safe to run with any parameter value.

```ts
// Validate parameter values before executing queries
const allowedCategories = ['tech', 'news', 'sports']
if (params.category && !allowedCategories.includes(params.category)) {
  throw createError({ statusCode: 400, message: 'Invalid category' })
}
```
::
