# Visual Editing

---

## Overview

`@nuxtjs/sanity` provides a simple method of integrating [visual editing](https://www.sanity.io/docs/visual-editing) in your Nuxt application. Before enabling this feature, make sure you have [Presentation](https://www.sanity.io/docs/presentation) installed in your studio.

::alert{type="warning"}
Installing `@sanity/client` is required for visual editing. The `minimal` client must not be enabled.
::

::alert{type=warning}
If you are using `pnpm` with `shamefully-hoist=false` (which is enabled by default for pnpm), you will also need to install the following dependencies:

```bash
pnpm i -D async-cache-dedupe debug parse-headers react react-dom react-is
```
::

## Configuration

You can configure visual editing via the `sanity.visualEditing` key in your Nuxt config. The following options are available:

#### `studioUrl`

- **Required**
- Type: **string**

The URL of the Sanity Studio with Presentation installed.

#### `token`

- **Required**
- Type: **string**

A Sanity read token used for server side queries. This is required in order to fetch draft content. This value will not be exposed to the client.

#### `mode`

- Type: **string**
- Default: **`'live-visual-editing'`**

Accepts one of the following options:

- **`'live-visual-editing'`** - Default behaviour. Lets the module handle setup to provide fully featured visual editing with live updates. Queries should be executed using `useSanityQuery`.
- **`'visual-editing'`** - Used to enable visual editing without live updates, for example if fetching data using the Sanity client directly. Passing a custom `refresh` handler is recommended, as by default the entire app will refresh to display updates.
- **`'custom'`** - The module will not handle any setup, instead the `useSanityVisualEditing` and/or `useSanityLiveMode` composables will need to be called manually.

#### `previewMode`

- Type: **boolean**, **object**
- Default: **true**

To enable preview mode with defaults, or optionally configure the endpoints used to enable and disable preview mode. If passing an object, the options that can be provided are:

- `enable` - the path of the enable endpoint, defaults to `/preview/enable`
- `disable` - the path of the disable endpoint, defaults to `/preview/disable`

#### `stega`

- Type: **boolean**
- Default: **true**

Used to enable or disable [stega](https://www.sanity.io/docs/loaders-and-overlays#1dbcc04a7093).


#### `refresh`

- Type: **function**

An optional function for overriding the default handling of refresh events received from the studio. This is generally not need needed if the `mode` option is set to `live-visual-editing`.

#### `zIndex`

- Type: **number**, **string**
- Default: **9999999**

The CSS z-index on the root node that renders overlays.

### Recommended Configuration

For most use cases, the following minimum `visualEditing` configuration will suffice:

```ts{}[nuxt.config.ts]
export default defineNuxtConfig({
  modules: ['@nuxtjs/sanity'],
  sanity: {
    // ... Sanity config
    visualEditing: {
      token: process.env.NUXT_SANITY_VISUAL_EDITING_TOKEN,
      studioUrl: process.env.NUXT_SANITY_VISUAL_EDITING_STUDIO_URL,
    }
  },
})
```
